Franz Kafka (3 July 1883 – 3 June 1924) was a German-language writer of novels and short stories, regarded by critics as one of the most 
influential authors of the 20th century. Kafka strongly influenced genres such as existentialism. Most of his works, such as "Die Verwandlung" 
("The Metamorphosis"), Der Prozess (The Trial), and Das Schloss (The Castle), are filled with the themes and archetypes of alienation, physical 
and psychological brutality, parent–child conflict, characters on a terrifying quest, labyrinths of bureaucracy, and mystical transformations.

Kafka was born into a middle-class, German-speaking Jewish family in Prague, then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. In his lifetime, most of 
the population of Prague spoke Czech, and the division between Czech- and German-speaking people was a tangible reality, as both groups were 
strengthening their national identity. The Jewish community often found itself in between the two sentiments, naturally raising questions about 
a place to which one belongs. Kafka himself was fluent in both languages, considering German his mother tongue.

Kafka trained as a lawyer and, after completing his legal education, obtained employment with an insurance company. He began to write short 
stories in his spare time. For the rest of his life, he complained about the little time he had to devote to what he came to regard as his calling.
He regretted having to devote so much attention to his Brotberuf ("day job", literally "bread job"). Kafka preferred to communicate by letter; 
he wrote hundreds of letters to family and close female friends, including his father, his fiancée Felice Bauer, and his youngest sister Ottla. 
He had a complicated and troubled relationship with his father that had a major effect on his writing. He also suffered conflict over being Jewish, 
feeling that it had little to do with him, although critics argue that it influenced his writing.

Only a few of Kafka's works were published during his lifetime: the story collections Betrachtung (Contemplation) and Ein Landarzt (A Country 
Doctor), and individual stories (such as "Die Verwandlung") in literary magazines. He prepared the story collection Ein Hungerkünstler (A Hunger 
Artist) for print, but it was not published until after his death. Kafka's unfinished works, including his novels Der Prozess, Das Schloss and 
Amerika (also known as Der Verschollene, The Man Who Disappeared), were published posthumously, mostly by his friend Max Brod, who ignored Kafka's 
wish to have the manuscripts destroyed. Albert Camus, Gabriel García Márquez and Jean-Paul Sartre are among the writers influenced by Kafka's work; 
the term Kafkaesque has entered the English language to describe surreal situations like those in his writing.

Familiy
Kafka was born near the Old Town Square in Prague, then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. His family were middle-class Ashkenazi Jews. His 
father, Hermann Kafka (1852–1931), was the fourth child of Jakob Kafka, a shochet or ritual slaughterer in Osek, a Czech village with a large 
Jewish population located near Strakonice in southern Bohemia. Hermann brought the Kafka family to Prague. After working as a travelling sales 
representative, he eventually became a fancy goods and clothing retailer who employed up to 15 people and used the image of a jackdaw (kavka in 
Czech) as his business logo. Kafka's mother, Julie (1856–1934), was the daughter of Jakob Löwy, a prosperous retail merchant in Poděbrady, and was 
better educated than her husband. Kafka's parents probably spoke a variety of German influenced by Yiddish that was sometimes pejoratively called 
Mauscheldeutsch, but, as the German language was considered the vehicle of social mobility, they probably encouraged their children to speak High 
German. Hermann and Julie had six children, of whom Franz was the eldest. Franz's two brothers, Georg and Heinrich, died in infancy before Franz 
was seven; his three sisters were Gabriele ("Ellie") (1889–1944), Valerie ("Valli") (1890–1942) and Ottilie ("Ottla") (1892–1943). They all died 
during the Holocaust of World War II. Valli was deported to the Łódź Ghetto in Poland in 1942, but that is the last documentation of her.

Hermann is described by the biographer Stanley Corngold as a "huge, selfish, overbearing businessman" and by Franz Kafka as "a true Kafka in 
strength, health, appetite, loudness of voice, eloquence, self-satisfaction, worldly dominance, endurance, presence of mind, [and] knowledge of 
human nature". On business days, both parents were absent from the home, with Julie Kafka working as many as 12 hours each day helping to manage 
the family business. Consequently, Kafka's childhood was somewhat lonely, and the children were reared largely by a series of governesses and 
servants. Kafka's troubled relationship with his father is evident in his Brief an den Vater (Letter to His Father) of more than 100 pages, in 
which he complains of being profoundly affected by his father's authoritarian and demanding character; his mother, in contrast, was quiet and shy.
The dominating figure of Kafka's father had a significant influence on Kafka's writing.

The Kafka family had a servant girl living with them in a cramped apartment. Franz's room was often cold. In November 1913 the family moved into 
a bigger apartment, although Ellie and Valli had married and moved out of the first apartment. In early August 1914, just after World War I began, 
the sisters did not know where their husbands were in the military and moved back in with the family in this larger apartment. Both Ellie and Valli 
also had children. Franz at age 31 moved into Valli's former apartment, quiet by contrast, and lived by himself for the first time.

Education

From 1889 to 1893, Kafka attended the Deutsche Knabenschule German boys' elementary school at the Masný trh/Fleischmarkt (meat market), now known 
as Masná Street. His Jewish education ended with his Bar Mitzvah celebration at the age of 13. Kafka never enjoyed attending the synagogue and 
went with his father only on four high holidays a year.

After leaving elementary school in 1893, Kafka was admitted to the rigorous classics-oriented state gymnasium, Altstädter Deutsches Gymnasium, 
an academic secondary school at Old Town Square, within the Kinsky Palace. German was the language of instruction, but Kafka also spoke and wrote 
in Czech; he studied the latter at the gymnasium for eight years, achieving good grades. Although Kafka received compliments for his Czech, he 
never considered himself fluent in Czech and spoke German with a Czech accent. He completed his Matura exams in 1901.

Admitted to the German Charles-Ferdinand University of Prague (de) in 1901, Kafka began studying chemistry, but switched to law after two weeks. 
Although this field did not excite him, it offered a range of career possibilities which pleased his father. In addition, law required a longer 
course of study, giving Kafka time to take classes in German studies and art history. He also joined a student club, Lese-und Redehalle der 
Deutschen Studenten (Reading and Lecture Hall of the German students), which organized literary events, readings and other activities. 
Among Kafka's friends were the journalist Felix Weltsch, who studied philosophy, the actor Yitzchak Lowy who came from an orthodox Hasidic Warsaw 
family, and the writers Oskar Baum and Franz Werfel.

At the end of his first year of studies, Kafka met Max Brod, a fellow law student who became a close friend for life. Brod soon noticed that, 
although Kafka was shy and seldom spoke, what he said was usually profound. Kafka was an avid reader throughout his life; together he and Brod 
read Plato's Protagoras in the original Greek, on Brod's initiative, and Flaubert's L'éducation sentimentale (Sentimental Education) and La 
Tentation de St. Antoine (The Temptation of Saint Anthony) in French, at his own suggestion. Kafka considered Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Flaubert, Franz
Grillparzer, and Heinrich von Kleist to be his "true blood brothers". Besides these, he took an interest in Czech literature and was also very fond 
of the works of Goethe. Kafka obtained the degree of Doctor of Law on 18 July 1906 and performed an obligatory year of unpaid service as law clerk 
for the civil and criminal courts.