Heiner Müller (January 9, 1929 – December 30, 1995) was a German (formerly East German) dramatist, poet, writer, essayist and theatre director. 
Described as "the theatre's greatest living poet" since Samuel Beckett, Müller is arguably the most important German dramatist of the 20th century after Bertolt Brecht. 
His "enigmatic, fragmentary pieces" are a significant contribution to postmodern drama and postdramatic theatre.

Müller was born in Eppendorf, Saxony. He joined the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands, SED) in 1947 
and began serving for the German Writers' Association (Deutscher Schriftsteller-Verband, DSV) in 1954. Müller became one of the most important 
dramatists of the German Democratic Republic and won the Heinrich Mann Prize in 1959 and the Kleist Prize in 1990.

His relationship with the East German state began to deteriorate, however, with his drama Die Umsiedlerin (The Resettler Woman) which was censored 
in 1961 after only one performance. Müller was banned from the Writers' Association in the same year. The East German government remained wary of 
Müller in subsequent years, preventing the premiere of Der Bau (Construction Site) in 1965 and censoring his Mauser in the early 1970s. 
Yet despite these hardships, Müller's work began to gain popularity both in West Germany and internationally at this time. Many of his best-known 
plays from this period were premiered in the West: this includes Germania Death in Berlin, which was first performed in 1978 at the Munich 
Kammerspiele. Heiner Müller himself directed a production of The Mission (Der Auftrag) in Bochum in 1982. In Paris, Jean Jourdheuil directed the 
world premiere of Hamletmachine (Die Hamletmaschine) in 1979. English translations, first by Helen Fehervary and Marc Silberman, then by Carl 
Weber, introduced Müller to the English speaking world in the mid- and late 1970s; Müller's controversial play Mauser was first performed in 1975 
in Austin, Texas.

Due to his growing worldwide fame, Müller was able to regain acceptance in East Germany. He was admitted to the Academy of the Arts (Akademie der 
Künste) of the GDR in 1984 – only two years before he became a member of the Academy of the Arts of West Berlin. Despite earlier honors, Müller 
was not readmitted to the East German Writers' Association until 1988, shortly before the end of the GDR. After the fall of the Wall, Müller 
became president of the East German Academy of the Arts for a short time in 1990 before its inclusion in the West German Akademie. In 1992, he 
was invited to join the directorate of the Berliner Ensemble, Brecht's former company at the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm, as one of its five 
members along with Peter Zadek, Peter Palitzsch, Fritz Marquardt and Matthias Langhoff. In 1995, shortly before his death, Müller was appointed 
as the theatre's sole artistic director.

During the last five years of his life, Müller continued to live in Berlin and work all over Germany and Europe, mostly directing productions of 
his own works. He wrote few new dramatic texts in this time, though, like Brecht, he did produce much poetry in his final years. In the last 
half-decade of his life, Müller also worked towards transforming the interview into a literary genre. Müller died in Berlin of throat cancer 
in 1995, acknowledged as one of the greatest living German authors and the most important German language dramatists since Bertolt Brecht. 
Müller is buried at Berlin's famous Dorotheenstadt cemetery, the final resting place of some of Germany's most important artists and philosophers: 
including Bertolt Brecht, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Karl Friedrich Schinkel, and Heinrich Mann. Müller's grave was designed by his last 
stage designer Mark Lammert.

Among his better known works, other than those already mentioned, are Der Lohndrücker (The Scab), Wolokolamsker Chaussee (Volokolamsk Highway) 
Parts I–V, Verkommenes Ufer Medeamaterial Landschaft mit Argonauten (Despoiled Shore Medea Material Landscape with Argonauts), Philoktet 
(Philoctetes), Zement (Cement), Bildbeschreibung (Description of a Picture aka Explosion of a memory) and Quartett.